Title: Understanding A1C Test | ADA
Source URL: https://diabetes.org/about-diabetes/a1c
Topic: diabetes

--- CONTENT ---

Understanding A1C What Is the A1C Test? The A1C test can be used to diagnose diabetes or help you know how your treatment plan is working by giving you a picture of your average blood glucose (blood sugar) over the past two to three months. Image How Does the A1C Test Work? It can identify prediabetes , which raises your risk for diabetes. It can be used to diagnose diabetes . And it's used to monitor how well your diabetes treatment is working over time. It's also a critical step in forming your game plan to manage diabetes with your diabetes care team. The big picture: monitoring treatment This relatively simple blood test can tell you a lot. The test results give you a picture of your average blood glucose (blood sugar) level over the past two to three months. The higher the levels, the greater your risk of developing diabetes complications. Your doctor will tell you how often you need the A1C test, but usually you’ll have the test at least twice a year if you’re meeting your treatment goals. If you're not meeting your goals or you change treatments, you may need to get an A1C test more often. Stay Informed Sign up for the Healthy Living e-newsletter to receive the latest resources on how to thrive with diabetes. Subscribe Interpreting Your A1C Results So, what do the numbers mean? When it comes to the numbers, there's no one-size-fits-all target. A1C target levels can vary by each person's age and other factors, and your target may be different from someone else's. The goal for most adults with diabetes is an A1C that is less than 7%. A1C test results are reported as a percentage. The higher the percentage, the higher your blood glucose levels over the past two to three months. The A1C test can also be used for diagnosis, based on the following guidelines: Image If your A1C level is between 5.7 and less than 6.5%, your levels have been in the prediabetes range. If you have an A1C level of 6.5% or higher, your levels were in the diabetes range. Finally: A1C is also reported as ‘estimated average glucose, ’ or eAG Another term you may come across when finding out your A1C is eAG. Your doctor might report your A1C results as eAG. eAG is similar to what you see when monitoring your blood glucose at home on your meter. However, because you are more likely to check your blood glucose in the morning and before meals, your meter readings will likely be lower than your eAG. A1C eAG % mg/dL mmol/L 6 126 7.0 6.5 140 7.8 7 154 8.6 7.5 169 9.4 8 183 10.1 8.5 197 10.9 9 212 11.8 9.5 226 12.6 10 240 13.4 Comparison of A1C and eAG meter readings More about A1C and eAG Learn how diabetes is diagnosed You might also be interested in Learn About Diabetes Diagnosis Image How is Diabetes Diagnosed? Learn about the different ways diabetes is diagnosed. Learn About Diabetes Diagnosis Learn About eAG and A1C Image A1C and eAG Read about the difference between eAG and the average on your blood glucose monitor. Learn About eAG and A1C Read More Image Checking Your Blood Glucose Checking your blood glucose level at any one time. Read More Read More Image Medication Management Get a handle on diabetes medication. Read More Read More Image Device Technology Better blood glucose meters and more. Read More Give Today and Change lives! With your support, the American Diabetes Association® can continue our lifesaving work to make breakthroughs in research and provide people with the resources they need to fight diabetes. Give Today