Title: Food Safety Basics | Food Safety | CDC
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/food-safety/about/index.html
Topic: food_poisoning

--- CONTENT ---

Food Safety Basics Mar. 9, 2026 At a glance Food can sometimes contain harmful germs, such as Salmonella and norovirus, that can make you sick. If you eat food containing germs, you can get a foodborne illness (sometimes called food poisoning). Some foods are more likely to contain germs, including raw flour and dough, raw chicken, and raw milk. "Food safety" refers to steps you and others can take to prevent foodborne illness. Overview Foods can sometimes be contaminated with germs that can make you sick. You may swallow these germs when: Eating foods that aren't cooked properly Germs from food spread to your hands, surfaces, or other foods (called cross-contamination) Food is not refrigerated properly after cooking There are many different types of foodborne germs that can cause illness, hospitalization, and even death. Some examples include Salmonella, norovirus, and Campylobacter. What is food safety? Food safety refers to practices that can reduce your risk of getting food poisoning. Signs and symptoms Signs and symptoms of food poisoning depend on the type of germ you swallowed. The most common symptoms include diarrhea, stomach pain or cramps, nausea, vomiting, and fever. Keep Reading Food Poisoning Symptoms Riskier foods Some foods are more likely to contain harmful germs, including: Raw or undercooked poultry, meat, seafood, or eggs Raw or undercooked sprouts Unwashed fruits and vegetables Cut melon Unpasteurized milk, juice, cider, or soft cheese Raw dough or raw batter made with uncooked flour Keep Reading Safer Food Choices People at risk Anyone can get food poisoning, but certain groups of people are more likely to get very sick from foodborne germs: People 65 and older Children under 5 years old People with weakened immune systems Pregnant women Keep Reading People at Increased Risk for Food Poisoning Reducing risk The best ways to avoid food poisoning include: Washing your hands and surfaces often, including rinsing fresh fruits and vegetables. Separating riskier foods, like raw meat and eggs, from other foods to avoid cross-contamination. Cooking food to the right temperature to kill germs. Refrigerating food promptly after cooking and thawing frozen food safely (not on the counter). Choosing safer foods, especially if you're more likely to get sick from foodborne germs. Keep Reading Preventing Food Poisoning Quick facts CDC estimates that each year 48 million people get sick from a foodborne illness, 128,000 are hospitalized, and 3,000 die. Keep Reading Facts About Food Poisoning What CDC is doing CDC helps make food safer by working with partners to track and investigate foodborne illness, identify sources of illness, and determine the best ways to prevent foodborne illness. Keep Reading What CDC is Doing Resources Current Outbreaks Current foodborne outbreak investigations and selected outbreak notices. FoodSafety.gov Mar. 9, 2026 Sources Print Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Syndicate Content Source: National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)